# Why the Bible is being changed by the Mandela Effect

Basically, they want to change the Bible so it fits the NWO / Luciferian/ New Age Religion and people are ready to accept the New Age Religion without having to stop believing their Bibles AND the people even get deceived into the thinking, that their Bibles even support the New Age Religion! In order to fully deceive the people, that they think, the Word of God supports the New Age Religion, they also need to [Gaslight](pages/introduction/gaslighting.md) People with the Mandela-Effects so that they doubt their own memories and accept the Changes in the Bible more readily and think their Bibles have always been that way and that those words really are the Words of God.

This is probably the GREAT DECEPTION that we are warned of in the Bible in 2 Thessalonians 2 and also Matthew 24.

They intend to change the Bibles step by step. (so that people every time doubt their memories and fall for the slightly altered versions) They plan on only change key phrases. First they replace the keyword with an other word that is very similar to the original word, afterwards they slightly drift away from the original meaning of the original word and stress an other meaning of the word that replaced the original word and then they change the word again.

Maybe they'll do this process several times until they reach the point, where scripture will not only be acceptable to the New World Order Religion, but also support the New Age Religion.

Speech from 1969 that tells us WHY they want to change the Bible (Source: [https://100777.com/nwo/barbarians#22](https://100777.com/nwo/barbarians#22))

>## BLENDING ALL RELIGIONS...THE OLD RELIGIONS WILL HAVE TO GO
>    Another area of discussion was Religion. This is an avowed atheist speaking. And he said, "Religion is not necessarily bad. A lot of people seem to need religion, with it's mysteries and rituals - so they will have religion. But the **major religions of today have to be changed because they are not compatible with the changes to come. The old religions will have to go. Especially Christianity.** Once the Roman Catholic Church is brought down, the rest of Christianity will follow easily. Then a **new religion** can be accepted for use all over the world. It **will incorporate something from all of the old ones** to make it more easy for people to accept it, and feel at home in it. Most people won't be too concerned with religion. They will realize that they don't need it.
>
>## CHANGING THE BIBLE THROUGH REVISIONS OF KEY WORDS
>    **In order to do this, the Bible will be changed.** It will be rewritten to fit the new religion. **Gradually, key words will be replaced with new words** having various shades of meaning. Then the meaning attached to the new word can be close to the old word - and as time goes on, other shades of meaning of that word can be emphasized. and then gradually that word replaced with another word." I don't know if I'm making that clear. But the idea is that **everything in Scripture need not be rewritten, just key words replaced by other words.** And the variability in meaning attached to any word can be used as a tool to change the entire meaning of Scripture, and therefore make it acceptable to this new religion. Most people won't know the difference; and this was another one of the times where he said, "the few who do notice the difference won't be enough to matter."
>
>##"THE CHURCHES WILL HELP US!"
>    Then followed one of the most surprising statements of the whole presentation: He said, "Some of you probably think the Churches won't stand for this," and he went on to say, "the churches will help us!" There was no elaboration on this, it was unclear just what he had in mind when he said, "the churches will help us!" In retrospect I think some of us now can understand what he might have meant at that time. I recall then only of thinking, "no they won't!" and remembering our Lord's words where he said to Peter, "Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my Church, and gates of Hell will not prevail against it." So .. yes, some people in the Churches might help. And in the subsequent 20 years we've seen how some people in Churches have helped. But we also know that our Lord's Words will stand, and the gates of Hell will not prevail.
>
>## RESTRUCTURING EDUCATION AS A TOOL OF INDOCTRINATION
>    Another area of discussion was Education. And one of the things; in connection with education that remember connecting with what he said about religion was in addition to changing the Bible he said that the classics in Literature would be changed. I seem to recall Mark Twain's writings was given as one example. But he said, the casual reader reading a revised version of a classic would never even suspect that there was any change. And, somebody would have to go through word by word to even recognize that any change was made in these classics, the changes would be so subtle. But the changes would be such as to promote the acceptability of the new system.